_docs/index.md, before:

---
title: Extempore documentation
permalink: /docs/
---

These docs are broadly grouped into **Overview**, **Reference** and **Guides**
sections. To navigate, use the sidebar on the left (or on top, if you're on
mobile).

The docs website has recently been redesigned with a view to making it easier
for others to contribute. It's just markdown, and every page has an *improve
this page* link at the bottom which takes you directly to the source `.md` file
on GitHub so that you can fix it up and submit a pull request.

## Getting help

Learning a new programming language is hard, so don't despair if you get
stuck and need help. The [mailing
list](mailto:extemporelang@googlegroups.com) and [google
group](https://groups.google.com/group/extemporelang) are good places to
start, or you could see if we're on the **\#extempore** IRC channel on
freenode.

For discussions about the docs themselves, there's a new **extempore-docs**
channel on the [livecode slack group](https://livecode.slack.com/) where you can
discuss issues/comments/suggestions for the docs. Contributing to the docs
[really is pretty easy]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _docs/overview/contributing.md
%}#documentation), so don't be afraid to pipe up if you've got ideas.

Commit message:

move some docs explanatory stuff around

_docs/index.md, after:

---
title: Extempore documentation
permalink: /docs/
---

Extempore's documentation is split into three main sections:

- the **overview** section discusses the key concepts in Extempore/xtlang
  programming, and is a good place to find out why things are the way they are
- the **reference** section is the main xtlang language reference
- the **guides** section contains longer-form tutorials for new users coming to
  Extempore from different backgrounds, including musicians, programmers, and
  newcomers to livecoding

To navigate, use the sidebar on the left (or on top, if you're on mobile).

This website has recently been redesigned to make it easier to contribute. It's
just markdown, and every page has an *improve this page* link at the bottom
which takes you directly to the source `.md` file on GitHub so that you can fix
it up and submit a pull request.

## Getting help

Learning a new programming language is hard, so don't despair if you get
stuck and need help. The [mailing
list](mailto:extemporelang@googlegroups.com) and [google
group](https://groups.google.com/group/extemporelang) are good places to
start, or you could see if we're on the **\#extempore** IRC channel on
freenode.

For discussions about the docs themselves, there's a new **extempore-docs**
channel on the [livecode slack group](https://livecode.slack.com/) where you can
discuss issues/comments/suggestions for the docs. Contributing to the docs
[really is pretty easy]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _docs/overview/contributing.md
%}#documentation), so don't be afraid to pipe up if you've got ideas.
