---
title: Extempore's Compiler-as-a-Service
---

{:.note-box}

This document is a deeper dive on what's going on when you use Extempore; if
you're just after the quick version then the [quickstart
guide]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _docs/overview/quickstart.md %}) might be what
you're after.

The best way to think about programming and evaluating code in Extempore is to
think of it as a *compiler-as-a-service* (CaaS). The compiler (provided by the
`extempore` executable) runs in a terminal, and you connect to it via a TCP
socket connection. When the compiler receives any code over this connection it
compiles and executes it. The general term for this is 'evaluating' the code.
There are some nuances to this process, but in general the programmer interacts
with a running Extempore process over a TCP connection.

The 'chunks' of code (serialised as strings) which are sent to the xtlang
compiler may be anything from small one-liners to whole source files (via the
`load` function). The functions and data (often referred to collectively as the
*environment*) persist for as long as the `extempore` process is running. As
discussed in the [philosophy]({{site.baseurl}}{% link
_docs/overview/philosophy.md %}) page, the Extempore compiler actually compiles
*two* languages: Scheme and xtlang (Extempore's own programming language). The
process of evaluating them is the same---just sending strings to the compiler
over the TCP port.

So, to do anything in Extempore you need a text editor which can

1.  open up a TCP connection to the compiler
2.  create a string which represents a valid chunk of Scheme or xtlang code
3.  send that string over the TCP connection

There are already Extempore modes/plugins for VSCode, Emacs, Atom, vim and
Sublime Text (see [editor support]({{site.baseurl}}{% link
_docs/guides/editor-support.md %})). If you already have a favourite text
editor, then you'll probably want to use that one. If you don't, then VSCode is
a good choice. In the end it doesn't matter too much which editor you use, so
pick the one that makes you happiest.

## Starting Extempore {#running-extempore}

The instructions for starting an Extempore "session" are listed on the
[quickstart]({% link _docs/overview/quickstart.md %}#using-extempore) page, so
we won't duplicate them here.

One thing about the Extempore startup process which is relevant here is the way
the compiler prints some information about starting up some processes, namely a
`primary` process on port `7099` and a `utility` process on port `7098`. These
are the TCP ports we'll send our code to. A running Extempore binary can provide
*multiple* Extempore processes (kindof like threads) as well as connecting to
multiple other Extempore processes, potentially running on remote hosts. This
forms the basis for Extempore's powerful distributed processing capability. For
the moment, though, you don't have to worry about multiple processes, just
connect and interact with the `primary` process.

## Connecting to the Extempore compiler {#connecting-to-the-extempore-compiler}

So far, all the stuff we've done has been in a terminal. The `extempore`
process, which provides the Extempore compiler, is just sitting there idle,
waiting to be given some code to evaluate. That's where the text editor part of
the equation comes in.

When you open up a file ending in `.xtm` (Extempore's default file extension),
your [editor]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _docs/guides/editor-support.md %})
should detect that you're editing Extempore source code, and load the
appropriate Extempore plugin. Here's a (short) example file containing some
Extempore code:

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/text-editor-start.png)

The content of the file is at the top, and I've also included a representation
of the "echo area" at the bottom. This is a part of your editor which displays
information about the results of different editor commands, and may also be
where the feedback from the Extempore compiler is "echoed" (printed out). It's
blank at the moment.

Now that we have

-   an editor open with some Extempore code
-   an Extempore (editor) plugin loaded
-   the `extempore` process still running

we can open up the TCP connection. In Emacs, this is done with <kbd>M-x</kbd>
`extempore-connect`. In VSCode, it's <kbd>ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>return</kbd>. In Atom,
with <kbd>alt</kbd>+<kbd>O</kbd>. In ST2, use the menu item `Tools > Extempore >
Connect...`. The default host and port arguments will be `localhost` and `7099`
respectively. If the connection is made successfully, then Extempore will echo
back the string "Welcome to extempore!".

## Evaluating code {#evaluating-code}

Once everything's hooked up, then the compiler is just waiting there for you to
give it some code to evaluate. So, from a 'blank slate' `.xtm` file, let's start
with some basic Scheme arithmetic. If you're playing along, you can write `(+ 1
2)` into your file somewhere.

This is where the 'Compiler as a Service' (CaaS) thing starts to get real.
Currently, the code `(+ 1 2)` is just text sitting in your editor. It won't get
compiled until you send it for evaluation. The easiest way to do this is to move
your cursor somewhere inside the code `(+ 1 2)` and hit
<kbd>ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>return</kbd> (in VSCode) or
<kbd>C</kbd>-<kbd>M</kbd>-<kbd>x</kbd> (in Emacs). In ST2, you have to highlight
the code you want to evaluate and hit <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>E</kbd>. This takes
the whole expression `(+ 1 2)` and sends it (as a string) to the running
`extempore` compiler.

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/scheme-eval.png)

The orange 'box' in the diagram indicates code that has been sent for
evaluation. See how the code string (in grey) is sent over the connection, and
the result is sent back (also as a string) and displayed in the echo area.
Nothing is printed in the terminal where `extempore` is running.
Congratulations---you've just evaluated your first Extempore code!

We can write some more code to `bind-val` a global variable `myPI`, which is an
xtlang global variable of type `double`. If you evaluate this what happens is

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-1.png)

One difference from the previous (Scheme) example is that the `extempore`
compiler now prints a message to the terminal:

~~~~ sourceCode
    Bound myPI >>> double
~~~~

Evaluating *xtlang* code will always print a message to the log about the name
and type of the variables. Also, notice how the string that is echoed back is
"\#t", which is the Scheme/xtlang literal for boolean `true`. This is what the
compiler returns if the value is '`bind-val`'ed successfully. It's worth
observing that what the `extempore` compiler prints to the log isn't the same as
the result it echoes back to the editor over the TCP connection.

How about compiling an xtlang closure?

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-2.png)

`circle_area` is an xtlang closure which takes a (`double`) argument
representing the radius of a circle and returns the area of that circle (another
`double`). It also uses the global variable `myPI` which we evaluated earlier.
The closure compiled successfully, and the compiler prints

~~~~ sourceCode
    Compiled circle_area >>> [double,double]*
~~~~

to the log. If there was a problem with the compilation, then the compiler would
have printed a (hopefully helpful) compile error to the log instead.

Let's find out the area of a circle of radius `5.0` units. We need to call
`circle_area` with the argument `5.0`.

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-3.png)

When we evaluate the `(circle_area 5.0)` expression, a couple of things happen.
The code is sent to the compiler, which returns the value `78.539816` to the
editor. In addition, a message about creating a new [memory
zone]({{site.baseurl}}{% link _docs/reference/memory-management.md %}) is
printed to the log. That's because this is the first time we've *called* some
xtlang code, and so a memory zone needs to be set up to provide any `zalloc`
memory. This zone allocation won't happen if we evaluate the same code again,
because the default zone already exists. The compiler in this 'created default
zone' message is just telling us helpful things about the state of our Extempore
world.

As another example of the difference between the *return value* of an xtlang
expression and any *side effects* it may introduce, have a think about how you
would get the circle's area printed to the log view, rather than returned and
shown in the echo area.

The answer: we can wrap the call to the `circle_area` closure in a call to
`println`. `println` is a built-in function which prints (to the log) a string
representation of whatever arguments it is passed.

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-4.png)

This time, the result (`78.539816`) is printed to the log. And the result
returned to the editor is different, too---it's now `#t`. That's because the
`println` function returns a value, indicating whether it was successful in
printing its arguments to the log or not. The actual *printing* is a 'side
effect' of the `println` function---behaviour that happens during the course of
the function's execution.

As a final basic example, we can send code to the compiler more than 'one
closure at a time'. Let's write another closure, this time for figuring out the
area of a 'doughnut':

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/doughnut-area.png)

Because we already have a closure (`circle_area`) for figuring out the area of a
circle, it makes sense to use that closure in our `doughnut_area` closure. The
area of the doughnut is the area of the outer circle (radius `r1`) minus the
area of the inner circle (radius `r2`).

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-5.png)

See how this time both the definition of the `doughnut_area` closure and the
call `(doughnut_area 5.0 2.5)` are sent to the compiler in the same 'chunk',
meaning that they were both highlighted in the editor before giving the
evaluation command. The results of this evaluation indicate that the two parts
of the code were both evaluated successfully: the `doughnut_area` closure
compiled successfully, and the result `58.904862` was returned to the editor.

## The power (and danger) of CaaS {#the-power-and-danger-of-caas}

Thus we've only evaluated code in the order it appears in the file. Closures
which use other closures or globals have all worked fine. But when we kill the
`extempore` process (i.e. with `SIGINT`), the Extempore environment we've 'built
up' isn't saved---it's destroyed.

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/extempore-restart.png)

After restarting the `extempore` process above, and reconnecting the editor to
it, let's try compiling the `doughnut_area` closure first:

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-compile-error.png)

The `circle_area` closure isn't there anymore, and so the compiler throws an
error (and no value is returned to the editor). Because the compiler is a
'service', it'll just evaluate the code and build up the environment in whatever
order you throw code at it. The source code isn't necessarily a linear
representation of the evolution of the environment---it all depends on the
'evaluation trajectory' that you take through the code.

So, if we go back and evaluate all the necessary code, everything works properly

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-6.png)

One other thing you can do is *redefine* the behaviour of existing functions and
variables. For example, say we wanted to change our `circle_area` function to
use an ancient Egyptian approximation for the area of a circle described on the
[Rhind papyrus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhind_papyrus) (c. 1800BC).

In the editor, *change the code* for the `circle_area` closure and re-evaluate:

![image](/images/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-7.png)

The result is (slightly) different, but not too far off---not bad for a 4000
year old formula. But the main thing is that the code to *call* `circle_area`
didn't change---only the definition did. The new closure definition has to have
the same signature as the old one, so that any code which calls the existing
closure will still work ok (type-signature wise). This re-configurability in the
behaviour of the code lies at the heart of [live coding](http://toplap.org), a
practice which has informed much of the design of Extempore.

This should be a serious challenge to any notion you may have had about the
source code being the canonical definition of how an Extempore 'program'
behaves. In live programming, the programmer is constantly both building *new*
code and data structures, and also redefining and re-evaluating *old* bits of
code to fit better with the current execution and environmental context. There
are lots of deep implications of this way of thinking about programming, and I
won't go into them here, but hopefully this has been helpful for thinking about
what programming in Extempore looks like.

Now, if you want to code everything up in source files which are evaluated
linearly from start to finish (e.g. with a call to `load`) then you can still do
that, too. All of the Extempore libraries (including those for DSP and graphics)
work that way, and Extempore still works great in that paradigm. But you have
the ability to dive in and change things if you need to, and that opens up some
interesting possibilities.

This is really just the tip of the compiler-as-a-service (CaaS) iceberg.
Extempore's CaaS will also let you do things like query for all bound symbols,
print all closures of a particular signature type, return the [abstract syntax
tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree) of a particular
closure, etc… In fact the Extempore compiler itself is fully runtime modifiable!
